comparison.md, before:

# Beacon vs Java, C, and Python - Language Comparison

## Executive Summary

**Beacon (BPL)** is a uniquely-expressive compiled language that combines Python's readability, C's performance, and Java's structure while introducing novel constructs for modern software development.

---

## Feature Comparison Matrix

| Feature | Beacon | Python | Java | C |
|---------|--------|--------|------|---|
| **Type System** | Dynamic | Dynamic | Static | Static |
| **Memory Model** | Manual + Scopes | GC | GC | Manual |
| **Compilation** | AST→JSON→C Runtime | Interpreted/JIT | Bytecode→JVM | Native |
| **OOP** | Blueprint/Spawn | Class-based | Class-based | Struct-based |
| **Collections** | `pack {}` | List/Dict | ArrayList/HashMap | Arrays |
| **Error Handling** | `attempt`/`trap`/`trigger` | try/except | try/catch | Return codes |
| **Modules** | `bring` + `toolkit` | import | import | #include |
| **Events** | `signal`/`listen` | ❌ (libs only) | ❌ (libs only) | ❌ |
| **Concurrency** | `paral` | async/threading | Threading | pthread |

---

## Syntax Comparison

### Hello World

**Beacon:**
```beacon
spec main:
    show "Hello, World!"
done
main()
```

**Python:**
```python
def main():
    print("Hello, World!")
main()
```

**Java:**
```java
public class Main {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        System.out.println("Hello, World!");
    }
}
```

**C:**
```c
#include <stdio.h>
int main() {
    printf("Hello, World!\n");
    return 0;
}
```

**Analysis:** Beacon balances verbosity (explicit `spec`/`done`) with readability (natural keywords).

---

## Unique Beacon Features

### 1. **Pack Collections**
```beacon
firm numbers = pack {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}
firm mixed = pack {"text", 42, On}
```

### 2. **Built-in Events**
```beacon
listen "UserLogin":
    show "User logged in!"
done
signal "UserLogin"
```

### 3. **Natural Language Keywords**
- `spec` (function), `firm` (const), `forward` (return), `done` (end)

---

## Conclusion

**Beacon = Python's elegance + C's speed + Java's structure + unique innovations.**

**Status:** Production-ready ✅

Commit message:

feat: implement traverse loops, update docs and website

comparison.md, after:

# Beacon vs Java, C, and Python - Language Comparison

## Executive Summary

**Beacon (BPL)** is a uniquely-expressive compiled language that combines Python's readability, C's performance, and Java's structure while introducing novel constructs for modern software development.

---

## Feature Comparison Matrix

| Feature | Beacon | Python | Java | C |
|---------|--------|--------|------|---|
| **Type System** | Dynamic | Dynamic | Static | Static |
| **Memory Model** | Manual + Scopes | GC | GC | Manual |
| **Compilation** | AST→JSON→C Runtime | Interpreted/JIT | Bytecode→JVM | Native |
| **OOP** | Blueprint/Spawn | Class-based | Class-based | Struct-based |
| **Collections** | `pack()` | List/Dict | ArrayList/HashMap | Arrays |
| **Error Handling** | `attempt`/`trap`/`trigger` | try/except | try/catch | Return codes |
| **Modules** | `bring` + `toolkit` | import | import | #include |
| **Events** | `signal`/`listen` | ❌ (libs only) | ❌ (libs only) | ❌ |
| **Concurrency** | `paral` | async/threading | Threading | pthread |

---

## Syntax Comparison

### Hello World

**Beacon:**
```beacon
spec main:
    show "Hello, World!"
done
main()
```

**Python:**
```python
def main():
    print("Hello, World!")
main()
```

**Java:**
```java
public class Main {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        System.out.println("Hello, World!");
    }
}
```

**C:**
```c
#include <stdio.h>
int main() {
    printf("Hello, World!\n");
    return 0;
}
```

### Loop Syntax

**Beacon (Traverse):**
```beacon
traverse i from 1 to 10:
    show i
done
```

**Python:**
```python
for i in range(1, 11):
    print(i)
```

**Analysis:** Beacon's `traverse` offers a readable, English-like alternative to standard for-loops.

**Analysis:** Beacon balances verbosity (explicit `spec`/`done`) with readability (natural keywords).

---

## Unique Beacon Features

### 1. **Pack Collections**
```beacon
firm numbers = pack(1, 2, 3, 4, 5)
firm mixed = pack("text", 42, On)
```

### 2. **Built-in Events**
```beacon
listen "UserLogin":
    show "User logged in!"
done
signal "UserLogin"
```

### 3. **Natural Language Keywords**
- `spec` (function), `firm` (const), `forward` (return), `done` (end)

---

## Conclusion

**Beacon = Python's elegance + C's speed + Java's structure + unique innovations.**

**Status:** Production-ready ✅
